docs: add protocol viz to Flex manual (#20800)
OpenTrons/opentrons-api: docs/flex/docs/opentrons-app/protocol-viz.md

---
title: "Opentrons Flex: Protocol Visualization"
---

It's important to test a new protocol before running it on your Flex. In the Opentrons App, you can use protocol visualization to: 

- See protocol steps, including labware and liquid changes, while offline and disconnected from your Flex.
- Detect and fix protocol errors before the first run.
- Quickly assess new protocols created with Protocol Designer, OpentronsAI, or the Python Protocol API

> Click **Visualize** on any Flex protocol's details page to get started. 

Reviewer: Couple 'o comments, a little bit backwards:

- The release note uses title case "Protocol Visualization" but on line 5, it's lower case. If this is the proper name for the feature, then capitalize.
- Nice use of bullets (I love bullet lists, look at all the verbs!). For the last, consider removing "Quickly" so the list items start with verbs: "See," "Detect," "Assess."

The intro sentence starts, "It's important to..." Consider removing that and jump right in and start with "Test a new protocol..." 

> ~It's important to~ test a new protocol before running it on your Flex.

3.6 Roentegen, not great but not terrible either.

---
title: "Opentrons Flex: Protocol Visualization"
---

It's important to test a new protocol before running it on your Flex. In the Opentrons App, you can use protocol visualization to: 

> - See protocol steps, including labware and liquid changes, while offline and disconnected from your Flex.

Reviewer 2: Avoids the implication that you _have_ to be disconnected from your robot.
```suggestion
- See protocol steps, including labware and liquid changes, even while offline and disconnected from your Flex.
```

- Detect and fix protocol errors before the first run.

> - Assess new protocols created with Protocol Designer, OpentronsAI, or the Python Protocol API.

Reviewer: These bullets are great, they all start with a verb in the imperative, a command "do this" that's nice and direct.

I want to return to that intro sentence. The "It's important to..." part. Is it really important? Why? To avoid all that, I recommend changing this intro. Some ideas:

- Test new protocols in the Opentrons App before running them on your Flex. Use protocol visualization to: <bullet list follows>

or flip this around and recombine:

- Use protocol visualization to test a new protocol in the Opentrons App before running them on your robot.  <-- maybe generic "robot" if this works on OT-2, but I don't know.

Reviewer 2: This is in the Flex manual and viz is Flex-only to start — that part is correct!

> Click **Visualize** on any Flex protocol's [details page](../touchscreen/protocol-details.md) to get started. You'll be able to see details for any protocol using API version 2.16 and newer.

Reviewer 2: This link goes to a page about the touchscreen, where viz is not (and will likely never be) available. Simplest fix is to just remove the link.

<figure markdown>
![Image showing protocol visualization in the Opentrons App](../images/protocol-viz.png)
</figure>

> The visualization screen shown above includes protocol steps on the left, a view of the Flex deck in the middle, and hardware and labware details on the right. The following sections take a closer look at using protocol visualization to preview, troubleshoot, and edit your Flex protocols. 

Reviewer: Does this text need to indicate left, right, and center if the features are clearly shown? Maybe this can be captured in the image caption?

## Protocol steps

Choose how to visualize your Flex protocol's steps: 

> - Click [blue play button] at the top of the page to play your protocol, and choose a playback speed (seconds per step).

Reviewer 2: We use `the play button :material-play-circle:` on the touchscreen run page; let's match that here.

- Click and drag the blue bar to move through the protocol steps. 

> - Scroll and click to choose a protocol step to view from the timeline on the left.

Reviewer 2: Verb-object parallelism with other bullets
```suggestion
- Scroll the timeline on the left and click on any protocol step to view it.
```

<figure markdown>
![Image showing the play bar at the top of the page.](../images/viz-play-bar.png)
</figure>

> As you visualize each step of your protocol, the deck view changes to include liquid, labware, and pipette tip changes.

Reviewer: Here, the "As you visualize..." part seems odd. Makes me feel like I'm in the cave with Carlos Castaneda and some peyote. It is the app, Protocol Viz, that's doing the work rather than the user. 

We could try to change this to show the app is doing the work (the visualizing)  rather than the user.

- The app updates the deck view to include..."
- Protocol Visualization updates the deck view to include..."

Author: Made a really simple change here.

!!! note
    In the example protocol above, liquids are assigned a color in Protocol Designer, so wells containing liquids are colored and changes on the deck are more visible.

>     You're not required to define or label liquids in protocols created using the Python Protocol API. In order to see liquid changes on the deck, we recommend using optional liquid labels and colors for the best protocol visualization.

Reviewer 2: "optional liquid labels" would be a great cross-reference!
```suggestion
    You're not required to define or label liquids in protocols created using the Python Protocol API. In order to see liquid changes on the deck, we recommend using [optional liquid labels][labeling-wells-and-reservoirs] and colors for the best protocol visualization.
```

> ## Labware and liquids

Reviewer 2: I think this section kind of hides two important concepts: slot spotlight and step details. How about giving them each their own H2? I think there's enough to say about both.

Author: breaking this section into two.

> At any point in your protocol, hover over labware on the deck to see labware names. For a closer look, click any slot to open a slot spotlight. 

Reviewer 2: I think it's important to explain that the slot spotlight:
- opens in a new window (this is a new interaction in the app)
- updates in real time as you navigate in the main window

It might be worth having a screenshot that shows the multiple windows.

<img width="1268" height="867" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/68d43c60-0bed-49ea-b772-22be9f989cc8" />

Author: I updated this to include a screenshot with multiple windows. I don't know that the resolution is great... see what you think.

<figure markdown>
![Image showing slot spotlight view.](../images/slot-spotlight.png)
</figure>

> Open slot spotlights for tip racks and labware on the deck or on a module to view tip, liquid, and module changes, like temperature, shake speed, or Thermocycler Module profiles.

Reviewer: There's something going on here I can't explain well. Is this describing a feature you can click on or is this something you just see in the app?

- Select a spotlighted spot to do something
- Select a spot spotlight
- Open a spot spotlight

Could be fine as is, something to consider. It caught my eye.

Reviewer 2: This feels a little too compressed. No harm in breaking out a couple use cases, like "Open a slot spotlight to see changes across the course of your protocol. For example, spotlight a slot with a tip rack and drag the blue bar to see how quickly tips from that rack are used. Or spotlight a slot with a module to see changes in temperature, lid position, or other status."

Author: This is really good, so I used it just about verbatim. Thanks :)

For each step, additional protocol details appear on the right side of the screen: 

- **Pipettes**: attached pipettes and their mounts, including the active pipette performing liquid handling actions.
- **Tip pickup**: a closer look at where tips will be picked up for this step, including the number of tips remaining in the rack.

> - **Well view**: well dimensions, the position of the pipette's attached tip, and a view of liquids in the well.

Reviewer 2: Maybe you didn't catch this — which means we definitely have to point it out to users — but you can hover over liquid in the well or tip to see the amount!

Author: I updated the screenshot to include the hover view and added a bit of text!

> - **Labware**: liquid and well changes in labware like well plates and reservoirs.

Reviewer 2: Maybe "top-down view of…" to contrast with the well view. You could say "side view" above as well.

> - **Disposal**: where the pipette will dispose of attached tips and the number of tips currently in the default trash container.

Reviewer 2: We got rid of the tip count (buggy), it will come back someday.

</figure>

For each step of your protocol, the deck view changes to include liquid, labware, and pipette tip changes.

!!! note
    In the example protocol above, liquids are assigned a color in Protocol Designer, so wells containing liquids are colored and changes on the deck are more visible.

    You're not required to define or label liquids in protocols created using the Python Protocol API. In order to see liquid changes on the deck, we recommend using [optional liquid labels][labeling-wells-and-reservoirs] and colors for the best protocol visualization.

## Step details

For each step, additional protocol details appear on the right side of the screen:

- **Pipettes**: attached pipettes and their mounts, including the active pipette performing liquid handling actions.
- **Tip pickup**: a closer look at where tips will be picked up for this step, including the number of remaining tips in the rack.
- **Well view**: well dimensions, the position of the pipette's attached tip, and a side view of liquids in the well. Hover over liquid in the well to view volumes.
- **Labware**: top-down view liquid and well changes in labware like well plates and reservoirs.

> - **Disposal**: where the pipette will dispose of attached tips and the number of tips currently in the default trash container.

Author: @ecormany you had a comment that I think got nuked when I pushed another commit.. I think you mentioned in it something about tip count being buggy and having been removed, but I can still see the remaining tips in the tip pickup view on the right side. 

What I can't see anymore in the latest alpha is the disposal view. Has this been removed?

Reviewer 2: Correct, the disposal card is gone entirely (for now). Delete this bullet.

<figure class="screenshot" markdown>
![Protocol viz details](../images/viz-details.png)
<figcaption> Examples of additional protocol details available on the right side of the screen.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Slot spotlights

At any point in your protocol, hover over labware on the deck to see labware names. For a closer look, click any slot to open a slot spotlight in a new window.

<figure class="screenshot" markdown>
![Image showing slot spotlight view.](../images/slot-spotlight.png)

> <figcaption>Open a slot spotlight for C1 to view changes for the Temperature Module and any labware and liquids inside. Hover over individual wells to view liquid volumes.

Reviewer 2: Phrasing this as an imperative makes it sound like this always happens when you spotlight C1, but it's just an example. 
```suggestion
<figcaption>A slot spotlight for C1, showing changes for the Temperature Module and any labware and liquids inside. Hover over individual wells to view liquid volumes.
```
